There earlier we had a look
in depth at inheritance.
The next thing I wanna
talk about is specificity.
And this is a topic that you may
know something about already but
we're going to drill into
this into great detail and
take a look at how specificity
will work inside of our CSS.
So let's start with our
definition from MDN.
Specificity is the algorithm used
by browsers to determine the CSS
declaration that is the most relevant
to an element, which in turn,
determines the property
value to apply the element.
So that is what we
are looking at today and
I know that a lot of you
are familiar with this.
Because as you are working away you
do things like add an ID to your
selector in order to
make it more specific so
that hopefully it will apply to
whatever it is you're trying to style.
So that is the concept that
we're talking about here.
In day one of boot camp, maybe possibly
day two, you were taught this,
ID's always be classes,
always be type selectors,
also those elements inside of your CSS,
that this is always true.
And as we just showed,
this is true until you're gonna factor
in the cascade and inheritance.
So if we look at specificity in a vacuum
and pretend that inheritance and
the cascade don't exist,
this is in fact true.
But, of course, we can interfere with
this by adding in inheritance or
lack of inheritance,
depending on how we've coded things, and
by factoring in what's
going on with the cascade.
So right now for
the purposes of learning specificity,
we're gonna focus on this in a vacuum and
pretend that inheritance and
the cascade do not work in
this world at the moment.
While we are also discussing specificity
to sort of neutralize the cascade,
we have to assume that all of
our styles are gonna originate
from the same style sheet or source.
So we are going to forget about the fact
that we have all of these style
sheets coming in from all of
the different external style sheets,
all of the embedded style sheets,
inline styles.
We're gonna pretend none
of that exists just for
the purposes of understanding specificity
because that is part of the cascade.
So when we think about how
specific something is, there's
actually a little bit of math that's done,
it's really easy, it's actually counting.
And what we're going to do is for our
given selector we are going to analyze it.
We are going to count how many
of each type of selector,
components of that selector,
are contributed to it overall.
So how many ID's do we have,
we're going to give that a number.
We're going to look at how many
classes that we have, in this case,
classes as you know and love them.
But also lumped in here
are pseudo-classes,
those are generally things that
start with the single colon.
There are a lot of
pseudo-classes these days but
some of the classic choices are,
link, visited, active, hover, focus.
We saw a bunch of them, the nth child,
nth of type, those are pseudo-classes.
And then we have attribute selectors.
So all of the attribute selectors,
regardless of type,
whether they are exact matches or
they're some of the substring variants,
all of those attribute selectors
are included as part of that.
And then finally,
we have our type selectors.
Which is some kind of element,
right, p-body, for
example, and all of those pseudo-elements.
Generally speaking at this point in time,
pseudo-elements start with a double colon,
double colon after, double colon before.
But in previous versions
of CSS prior to CSS3,
we had pseudo-elements but
they have only single colon to them.
So sometimes you will see, for example,
before written with a single
colon instead of a double colon.
That is the reason why before is one
of the older pseudo-elements and
some people will still write
it with a single colon.
So watch for that,
it can trip you up in determining
the specificity of a given selector.
So those are the big rules when it
comes to figuring out specificity.
Then we have all
the exceptions to the rules.
So here's the way the exceptions work.
First of all,
what has no specificity to it at all.
When you see it in a selector,
we don't count any of them, these.
That would be the universal selector,
the star and the where pseudo-class.
Where itself counts for nothing,
any selector inside of the where
parenthesis counts for nothing, so
it has no specificity whatsoever.
We don't need to count in our specificity
calculations the parent child selector or
the adjacent sibling selector or
the general sibling selector.
We don't need to count those at all,
they may show up in a declaration,
we can safely ignore them.
Two big exceptions when you are thinking
about specificity are the not and
is pseudo-classes.
With these,
we don't count them as pseudo-classes, so
we don't count them as not with
its number and is as a number.
But inside of the parenthesis we do
count some portion of those selectors.
And in the case of is we would take
the one with the highest specificity and
the same is true for not.
So whichever selector inside of the
parenthesis has the highest specificity,
that is the one that counts.
So let's see how this works.
We're gonna calculate that
specificity by counting and
then we're going to generate basically
what amounts to a 3-digit array.
It's not a number like 100 or 120,
it is an array of one dash one dash zero,
so think of it that way.
Estelle Weyl has done a great
job of explaining this
specificity work through
her CSS specificity page
which you can get to by
going to specificity.com.
It will walk you through
a lot of these calculations.
At the end she throws in also
inline styling and bang important,
which we're gonna talk
about a little bit later.
It does need a little bit of an update now
with these new pseudo-classes for is and
where, in particular, need to be reflected
on this and she says that's coming.
But that is a great resource to take
a look at, to print out, to put by
your desk if you need a reference
to remember exactly how this works.
So let's do a few of these now.
I'm gonna give you a selector, I've given
you the cheat sheet underneath and I want
you to take a look at that selector and
see if you can calculate its specificity.
So, for example, here is ul li a.
Those are three type selectors,
so we have no ID's,
no classes, three types selectors,
our number is 0-0-3
Go onto another one,
we have div#anchor, one id,
no classes, one type,
so our number is 1-0-1.
A.bgcolor:hover, so we have a with a class
of background color in the hover state.
So here we have no ID's,
we have a class of bgcolor,
we have a pseudo-class of hover and
we have an a selector,
just type selector, so
this would be 0-2-1.
We get more complicated,
you might have something like this,
ul li:nth-child (even) a:any-link.
Count them up again, we have no IDs.
We have two pseudo-classes,
any-link and nth-child.
We have three HTML elements in
that type selectors, 0-2-3.
Here's survey li + li : : first-letter.
So first-letter is a pseudo-element, li of
course is a type selector survey is an ID.
So that would be 1-0-3.
Ul * a.active: link,
we're going to count those up,
link is a pseudo-class,
active is a class, so that is 2.
We have no IDs, we have ul and
a those are type selectors.
And then remember the universal
selector counts for nothing, so
our number is 0-2-2.
Here's article:not(#beginning) h4.small.
So beginning is an ID it's
inside of the not pseudo-class.
We count beginning as an ID,
but we don't count not.
So we have one ID, one class,
two HTML elements, so we have 1-1-2.
What about where?
So here with where we have it inside of
the parenthesis, we have a type selector,
we have a class and we have an ID.
Outside of it we have a type selector and
a pseudo-element.
So how do we count this?
It is actually going to be 0-0-2 remember
with where, it counts for nothing.
Everything inside of
the parenthesis counts for
nothing, where itself counts for nothing.
It is 0-0-2, just the 2 for
the li and the marker.
What about the same selector using is
instead, this is going to be different.
We count the highest specificity
inside of the is parenthesis.
So here we're going to count
the ID of important, but
not the article, not the warning.
So our number this time is 1-0-2.
All right, so with that in mind as to
how we calculate our specificities,
let's go take a look at some
of this inside of code.